# Creative Writing 1240

The contemporary age is one of tremendous upheaval and uncertainty for
the literary arts. New technologies challenge established business
practices. Nascent and rapidly emerging markets pose new questions
about processes and products. Conflicted conversations about rights
and the uses of creative commodity dominate an increasingly fractured
landscape. this turbulent tumble lies the writer as artist: pressured
by the exigencies of commerce, burdened by the minutiae of
intellectual property law, increasingly hobbled by anxiety and
disorientation.

The writer now feels at the whim of indifferent and unpredictable
forces. The buffers which once protected professional writers from the
messiness and incipient momentum of the market are now, for the most
part, dismantled or disintegrating. Creative and professional paths
that once were secure are now fraught with new obstacles. The sacred
space of creative inquiry seems under threat. The artifacts of that
inquiry have lost much of their meaning. The casual blog has
vanquished the thoughtful book.

At least, this is how it seems to many writers working today: dark
times, enemies at the gate. But this is how all the great stories
begin. Turbulence – emotional, cultural, political – is the source and
fuel of creativity. The current age is thus a great gift. Artists and
writers are now free, in the philosophical (and perhaps spiritual)
sense, free to pursue the clamour and craft of their work, in a manner
that we have not encountered before. Not since the audacious invention
of writing itself. Creative Writing 1240 invites writers to discover –
or rediscover – the unrivaled adventure of creative work in the world
today. The path forward is not labyrinthine but requires, rather –
like most daunting tasks – that a small number of simplicities reveal
themselves behind the swirl of turbulence. Course participants will
learn about various technologies of creativity – this, of course, is a
pertinent and pressing matter – but the course workshop is not,
primarily, another introduction to blogging, social networking, web
content, and viral marketing. These are only the outer appearance –
the carapace, the shell – of what amounts to a re-imagining of what it
means to be a creative person in the world today.

Creative Writing 1240 is a course about reclaiming the fundamental
right of creative endeavour and choosing the paths that lead forward.

Freedom, adventure, opportunity: these are the watchwords of the
contemporary creative professional. Every age calls its inhabitants to
action. How do we know this? Writers tell us. How do they tell us? By
facing their own crises of confidence, by wrestling with the emerging
norms and practices of their time, by seizing the word as their
instrument and their stand. Why should we expect our age to be any
different? Why would we want it to be?
