---
layout: post
title: 'Self-awareness: The Hard Problem'
author: ross
tags: [self-awareness]
categories: [creativity]
---

My [work](http://rosslaird.com) involves helping people solve
problems. Sometimes those problems are developmental (how to
facilitate healthy environments for kids and families), sometimes they
are organizational (how to build programs for addictions recovery and
mental health), and sometimes they are educational (how to be
resilient and creative). I find myself in many different contexts,
with many kinds of people, working on a diverse range of problems. But
solutions almost always begin the same way: with self-awareness.

No one masters the skills of self-awareness. Introspection,
self-regulation, metacognition, mindful and ethical action, empathy,
authenticity, integrity: these and many other aspects of
self-awareness are immensely complex and challenging. We make modest
gains only by way of sustained commitment to improving relationships
with ourselves and others. We stumble upon many hurdles
(self-importance, ego, self-sabotage, insecurity, hiding,
self-delusion, denial, and many others.) Deeper self-awareness leads
to many improvements in our lives, but they are hard-won and
incremental.

The path of self-awareness is the most demanding odyssey we can
undertake. Most people understandably approach it with dread &ndash;
at least in the beginning. They are not accustomed to introspection
and self-assessment, to the vulnerability and uncertainty that arise
when they turn their attention inward. It's easy to become overwhelmed
and disoriented. Self-awareness work is hard. Asking ourselves tough
questions about our values and our behavior is hard. Opening ourselves
to confront and heal our emotional wounds is particularly hard. For
most people, it seems easier to avoid the work of self-awareness
&ndash; to distract ourselves with coping behaviors and addictions
&ndash; but of course, in the long run, denial of the inner life will
take you down. (The troubling rise in mental health and addictions
problems is one consequence of our failure, as a society, to
acknowledge this ancient and basic truth.)

In my work, I encounter varying degrees of receptivity to the work of
self-awareness. Counselors and therapists &ndash; as you might expect
&ndash; tend to embrace self-awareness as a foundational value, as do
community service organizations. Corporations are a mixed bag: some
are open and encouraging of self-awareness &ndash; especially if
modeled by leaders &ndash; whereas others are hostile and corrosive
toward anything that sounds resembles introspection. (Obviously, the
organizational health of the former is much better than the latter.)
Parents are usually willing to work on their self-awareness because
they know it will help their kids, though they get stuck in a
multitude of ways. (Example: parents like the idea of cultivating
autonomy in their kids but are often dismayed when that autonomy
challenges family norms and values.)

Humans are a diverse bunch, and I appreciate that my work takes me
into environments where I can see many different approaches to
personal development. Most of the time, people recognize the intimate
connection between self-awareness and foundational values such as
belonging, [trust](http://danariely.com/resources/the-blog/), empathy,
and emotional safety. They perceive the direct link between their own
development and the health of their communities. They recognize that
even though self-awareness is hard, working on it benefits everyone.

Where it goes well.

Where it goes bad.

People leaving (loss of diverse voices)

My experience with then it goes bad (also in academia).

Students needing help (kindness, encouragement, mentorship; what
students say)

Spark and flame

Possible pathways

---

Self-awareness is the path of solving hard problems. It's easy to
recognize this in the context of social issues involving parenting,
mental health, and addictions. We can see how those kinds of problems
respond well to self-awareness work, and we unreservedly support
counseling and therapy (which are self-awareness initiatives) for
those problems. Sometimes we support self-awareness projects in the
workplace. But we have yet not found ways of encouraging
self-awareness in environments where they are sorely needed: in
education, and in the sciences.


---

Let's explore this by way of an illustration. One of the most
difficult challenges in contemporary science involves the question of
dark matter. Either dark matter exists, or our ideas about gravity are
wrong. We have two options: we can modify our understanding of
gravity, or we can revise our fundamental ideas about matter. One or
the other; not both. Scientists prefer to see this simmering conflict
of perspectives as a Â purely scientific conundrum that is solvable
using purely intellectual tools. And yet, this debate has become
fraught with interpersonal conflict, tribalism, bias, self-interest,
and many other features of normal, messy, human interaction. It's a
behavioral pattern with a
[long](http://astroweb.case.edu/ssm/mond/stakes.html) and
[well-documented](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Structure_of_Scientific_Revolutions)
history in science.

When it comes to the question of dark matter, interpersonal conflicts
and self-interest have [begun to
hijack](https://aeon.co/ideas/has-dogma-derailed-the-scientific-search-for-dark-matter)
the search for truth. This happens all the time in families and in
communities, but scientists don't like it when it happens to them. And
they (typically) don't like to admit it. They prefer their realm to be
free of emotions, unencumbered by the complexities of human moods and
feelings. And that's a problem. After all, the scientific enterprise
is a human activity, and it is just as embroiled in the messiness of
human interaction as anything else. Those in the scientific community
are not more rational than the rest of us (most people are [not
rational](https://youtu.be/vvkgHOzTEtQ), most of the time). They are
not free of the deep and complex urges and instincts that drive
everyone.

The only way to usefully grapple with those urges and instincts is by
developing greater self-awareness, and if your culture does not
support that path, the eventual outcome is almost invariably to become
stuck. And that's what has happened in the debate between dark matter
and modified gravity. One of the greatest questions of our age has
been stalled by the difficulty people face in working together,
challenging their own assumptions, setting aside their own biases and
tribalisms, stepping momentarily outside the sphere of their own
self-interest to see the question from the other side. What's required
is a range of skills focusing on introspection, self-assessment,
ethical metacognition, empathy, trust, and emotional safety. These
values and practices are not (generally) part of the scientific
enterprise. And yet, the question of dark matter (probably) cannot be
settled without them.

The dark matter dilemma is a specific example of a general problem in
academia.

The [blog
posting](https://proflearn.bccampus.ca/storming-the-ivory-tower-a-workshop-on-transforming-post-secondary-education/)
from Leva Lee.  The [blog
posting](https://proflearn.bccampus.ca/storming-the-ivory-tower-a-workshop-on-transforming-post-secondary-education/)
on BCCampus.  The [video of session
one](https://admin.video.ubc.ca/index.php/extwidget/preview/partner_id/134/uiconf_id/23448122/entry_id/0_g4f6yp8b/embed/auto?&flashvars[streamerType]=auto)
The [video of session
two](https://admin.video.ubc.ca/index.php/extwidget/preview/partner_id/134/uiconf_id/23448122/entry_id/0_kbyr0lwd/embed/auto?&flashvars[streamerType]=auto)
